something a little bit different this
time we're going to have a look at an
asteroid an asteroid that's been given
the name benu which is derived from a
mythological Egyptian bird and so in
fact all of the features that have been
discovered on the surface of benu are
named after various
birds so benu was first discovered in
1999 and it was realized very rapidly
that it was a Neo a near Earth object
coming close to the Earth every six
years and the animation there is a gold
stone radar image of benu it's not a
particularly high resolution but it was
a the first attempt at trying to
understand this relatively small
asteroid from the data and the animation
and further study they were able to
produce a model of the shape of this
asteroid which is quite interesting it
almost looks like it's cubic doesn't it
as it rotates there um and it's
certainly fatter around its equatorial
Ridge there than at the poles so that
was the image derived from radar studies
but actually when we sent a spacecraft
there we found this which confirms that
they pretty much got it right this shows
benu rotating every 4.9 hours and they
were able to see a couple of things from
this first it's getting fast
is gradually spinning up more quickly by
1 second every 100 years so not a very
great uh rapid increase but an increase
nonetheless and that's powered by the
effect of the heat from the Sun and uh
perhaps by the gradual shrinkage of benu
rather like a figure skater on Ice who
rotates and pulls their arms in and goes
into a faster spin what I about this
animation are the giant Boulders that
you can see on the surface here um and
this is a real image it's not an
artist's impression of just what a
rubble pile benu is and how individual
extra rocks have sort of landed on the
surface you can imagine the one that's
going around in the middle there
previously having been orbiting for some
time and gradually spiraled in until
it's just sat on the surface so uh
fascinating to see that now itself it's
not particularly big 500 m in diameter
that doesn't sound like much but it's
enough that it weighs 1 billion
tons and when you work out from the size
and the mass of the object you find the
density and it's less dense overall than
water so there's probably a lot of voids
inside here there's very little gravity
holding it together so there's no reason
for the gaps between all those lumps of
rubble to be squeezed out and so there's
probably a lot of holes inside the
material that material seems to be very
carbon Rich it's a carbonaceous c type
asteroid C for carbon and very very dark
in color I mean the picture makes it
look quite bright but really this is a a
near black and they've had to wind the
contrast up to make this
picture and ctype asteroids are
generally found f out in the outer parts
of the asteroid belt rather than in the
inner solar system coming into uh the
region of the
earth so quite strange now some people
have also made suggestions that maybe
it's not just low density but Hollow and
of course that's brought people out
saying oh benu is an alien spacecraft
doesn't look like one to me
really that 500 meter Di
550 to be precise across the equ
equatorial direction is a lot bigger
though than the meteor that uh exploded
over chel abinsk about 10 years ago and
broke a whole lot of Windows and sent
flying glass and injured a few people
and uh I've actually got a fragment of
the Chell abinsk meteor in my collection
but uh benu whole different story much
bigger so something we need to perhaps
worry about in terms of uh near Earth
orbits and talking of orbits here's a
little plot of that orbit showing how it
crosses the uh Earth's orbit in fact
shown Crossing twice a year but of
course there's a slight tilt so one of
those is a much closer approach than the
other and uh in fact intersects the
orbit of Mars as well so it's one of
these bodies that is potentially held in
a
orbital uh lock by Crossing with two
planets and we see that in a number of
objects in the solar
system so I say it crosses the orbit and
in fact in
2060 we've got this little animation of
this purple track of benu from the
Earth's point of view so we're holding
the Earth the blue dot in the middle
still and if you do that then the orbit
of Vu looks like this rather crazy
purple line and you can see how it comes
very close to us quite a close approach
there and then later on an even closer
approach so here it comes around
again spiraling closer to us and there
is the close approaching uh that it's
going to make so quite fascinating and
when it does so this will be 120% of the
Moon's distance from the earth so not
dangerous at that distance
not really any chance of it hitting
looks a bit like it on the picture
doesn't it and at that size 500 MERS
across it be too dim to see so not the
most spectacular event but we are
worried about this meteor uh this
asteroid in the long run because when we
Trace those repeated Crossings there's
one in 2031 which brings it much closer
than the moon in fact 65,000 mil so only
twice as far away really as uh many of
our communication satellites maybe three
times as far something like that um but
a lot less distant than the uh 300,000
miles that it is out to lunar orbit
so quite dangerous 2175 it comes by
again and all these passes are on the
25th of September that's the date at
which those orbits intersect so we are
crossing Ben's Orbit on the 25th of
September and it just so happens that on
these particular years benu will be in
that part of its orbit at the time now
it's a one in 24,000 chance that that
will actually hit the Earth at that
point that's pretty remote and uh
anything below about 1% we tend to not
be too concerned about although these
things do need watching but if you add
up all the close approaches over the
next 200 years that the odds of that
making an impact Dro to one in
2700 and the reason that we would worry
about this is because in fact it's quite
difficult to predict the orbits of
asteroids what happens is that they are
orbiting they should behave perfectly
normally and be controlled by gravity
you would think but heat from the Sun
plays A Part as well because these
bodies are relatively small what happens
is that the sun's heat hits one side of
the asteroid and heats it up and then
the asteroid rotates
around taking that warmed side away from
the direct sunlight and it starts
radiating that heat out into the cold of
space as infrared light and that creates
a slight
thrust so you have a heated sunw side a
warm side that's recently been heated
and then it's colder on the reverse side
and the uh side that is essentially Dawn
for the satellite and so there is a
Thrust away from the Sun created by the
radiation pressure and a Thrust
laterally because the sunset side is
warmer than the
sunrise side and so the infrared
radiation gives it a a little bit of a
push and of course what happens depends
on which way round the body is rotating
and so this so-called yovi effect tends
to cause asteroids to wander off the
perfectly elliptical path even after
allowing for all the perturbing effects
of the planets and so making predictions
into the future is quite
difficult and so given that this has
this chance of coming our away
and that it might one day hit the earth
it was decided that we would send a
spacecraft and the Osiris Rex mission
was dedicated to this task named after a
a mythological bird as I said Osiris Rex
looks a bit like a heron there in the
picture so they tell me with the wings
of the solar panel so the spacecraft was
launched and set off towards a uh benu
and here's the first image from its
onboard cameras the green circle been
added tracking the movement of the its
Target across the Starfield there so it
was gradually homing in as it approached
benu one of the images that it took was
this one showing quite a reasonable
image of the rocky surface of benu and
lots and lots of small fragments um as
if benu was shooting uh rocks out in the
direction of the
spacecraft um and this was a little bit
of a surprise and uh leads to um
underpinning something which was
suspected for a while which is that as
we cross the September the 25th orbit
Crossing um creates a minor meteor
shower small fragments of benu that have
been ejected from it seem to fall into
our atmosphere and the Earth sweeps them
up as it goes around and it creates a
minor meteor shower now this is not one
to go outside and Target because I think
the uh zhr there Zen hourly rate the
number of meteors per hour is one
whereas some of the really big meteor
showers it's more like a 100 so uh you
you might be able to identify meteor but
there are a number of random meteors
anyway but the the point is that there
are fragments of benu coming to to Earth
already from that orbital
Crossing here's another fantastic
picture showing that Rubble pile
composition with Boulders sort of 60 M
across that sort of size and at the
bottom there the the ridge this uh
equatorial Ridge sticking out slightly
um and we see that on a number of bodies
in the solar system we'll look at those
later perhaps in another talk but as
they approached they were looking to see
where they would actually touch down and
they were choosing a number of possible
Landing sites there are some shots here
of some of the landing sites on the
Northern Hemisphere just taken from just
over a mile 1.8 kilometers above the
surface there showing places that uh
they could potentially aim for to go and
touchdown and grab a sample to bring
home and in 2020 on the 208th of October
we received this image series back of
the uh probe of the Lander descending
onto the surface and you can see as it
makes contact here we go it kicks up a
whole lot of fragments and then the
spacecraft rather rebounded off the
surface this was planned it wasn't
aiming to touch down and stay there and
it went in with the lid of its
collecting container open with the aim
of dislodging a whole load of fragments
and collecting some of them into the
Container so here's an image of it
actually at the moment of impact there
and the idea was to try and get about 60
grams of material but in the end it
actually managed to pick up a whole
kilogram so did very much better at
collecting fragments than was planned
although there was some difficulty uh
with the spacecraft they couldn't get
the lid shut on the container for a
while uh but eventually that was all
sorted out and uh the uh fragments were
locked away ready to bring back to the
Earth one of the things they noticed on
the surface from some of these detailed
images was a number of bright grains
that are uh here and these appear to be
pyxine U minerals and we believe these
are fragments of Vesta we have a number
of fragments of the asteroid Vesta here
on Earth there's a massive crater on the
nose of vea the ri silver crater and
possibly almost large enough of of an
impact that made that crater to have
nearly destroyed Vesta it's created a
vast shower of fragments many of which
have landed on the earth very very
common type of meteorite in fact and uh
here is further evidence of that impact
with fragments of one asteroid having
landed on the surface of
another so what of uh the results well
one of the results that was soon
discovered on the from the spacecraft as
it approached benu was water the
spectrometer was able to reveal the uh
infrared spectrum of there being quite a
lot of water molecules present so much
so in fact that we think about 1% of the
total mass of benu that billion tons is
water so 10 million tons of water
approximately most of it's locked up in
hydration of minerals there are minerals
called phos silicates Metals with uh
silicon oxides and water and these seem
to have uh locked up quite a lot of the
water but some of it's probably there as
Ice and there might even be pockets of
water trapped in some of the voids
inside
now water we've got a lot of water on
Earth but having water available in
space somewhere where the gravity is
very low could be an excellent place to
go and retrieve this water reprocess the
material extract the H2O uh and use it
as water or split it into hydrogen and
oxygen uh for the use of further Rocket
Fuel so we could end up with benu being
some where that uh there's a a fuel
station in space for uh future
spacecraft probably a long time into the
future that
one so Osiris Rex headed back to Earth
armed with its kilogram of uh benu dust
and didn't land but it dropped a capsule
and here's the capsule landed in
September of 2023 in the utar desert I
mean it used the fact that vu's orbit
with which it was co- trving crosses the
Earth's orbit in 20 in September hence
the date but it was able to nicely land
and here's the container opened with the
benu dust in it in the central part of
the image there and then on the right
we've got some microscope images of some
of the grains the material's been
distributed to many Labs over the past
uh 18 months or so all around the world
for whole host of different analysis to
be carried out now one of the things
that was found was again confirmation of
a lot of this water and quite a lot of
it was in the presence of hydrated
carbonate
minerals veins of white bright material
running through the rest of the asteroid
some of them as as thick as 6 Ines wide
and a meter
long and these carbonates
must have formed in hot warm water they
just don't form these hydrated carbonate
met materials anywhere else uh we find
these in in the geological record on the
earth and it's uh evidence of a warm wet
period um when you find things like cap
carbonate rocks and so forth so now this
is interesting because Beno itself is
too small really to have been able to
reach a temperature that would have
created these minerals and it suggests
that they were formed elsewhere and and
the theory goes that perhaps benu was
part of a larger object in the past uh
and this makes some sense because of its
location and the fact that we don't tend
to find this type of asteroid in orbit
close in in the inner part of the solar
system these ctype carbonous asteroids
tend to be further out so it's likely
and some of the dating of the materials
the last time they were melted and so
forth confirms that probably 700 million
years ago some people say a bit uh
further back maybe 2,000 million years
ago but I tend to go with the 700
million years uh on the body of evidence
that there is this seems to have been a
collision between two baby planets two
Planet asmal two large asteroids
whatever you want to call them out in
the asteroid belt and a number of
fragments many small ones and some large
ones were created as the uh impact RI
ripped a larger parent body apart and it
was probably on that parent body where
it was large enough and warm enough as a
result of trapping all the heat of
formation and the radioactive
nucleotides to have liquid water and
warm liquid water running through the
veins inside the Rock and creating those
carbonates the hydrated carbonate
materials so that Collision broke up the
larger parent body and sent benu into an
orbit that it's now in uh controlled by
Mars and the Earth in terms of
gravitational lock but it also probably
created a number of other larger
asteroids and there are three particular
ones in cases in point Nissa poana and
yalia and these are really much much
bigger a thousand times the size of benu
so we've got 113 kilm fora poana 55 and
ulalia 19 kilometers so benu is only
half a kilometer remember 500 M so these
are the big members of this family and
they probably all came from from the
destruction of a larger object out there
in the uh outer reaches of the asteroid
belt there's also asteroid rugu which
looks very similar to benu that was
visited by a different spacecraft the
hassu Busa 2 spacecraft from Japan so
it's interesting to see that these uh
objects are there and were further out
in the solar system when they were born
um and then broken up
but the real interesting fact that has
only come out in January of 2025 which
was leading me to make this talk at all
was the fact that the results from the
chemical analysis at labs around the
world are showing that we can detect 14
of the 20 amino acids that make up the
proteins of all living things on earth
in the material in benu now we've known
amino acids have been found in
meteorites and so forth but this is a
very large collection and to find 20
sorry 14 out of 20 of the important
amino acids
preexisting in these bodies that have
come from the asteroid belt is
fascinating but even more fascinating we
have found all five of the a t c g and U
nucleotide by is the nitrogen containing
aromatics that make up the core of DNA
or RNA the and code by their sequence
for uh the whole of Life as We Know It
And so it seems extraordinarily likely
that the Earth has been bombarded by
fragments of these asteroids we we're
still seeing occasional meteors in
September as part of that that as I've
already said and it seems that that
probably been going on since the dawn of
the solar system and maybe that the
seeds of Life came to the Earth from
these uh bodies out there and possibly
from this destroyed baby planet in the
outer part of this asteroid belt region
uh a little bit further from the Sun
where conditions were just right to cook
up the uh itial organic soup and maybe
the brins of benu where the broth of
life with the building blocks uh fell to
Earth back then 4,000 million years ago
and kicked everything off wouldn't that
be interesting it' be very very
difficult to be certain about something
like this but uh the thing I love about
this subject is all these connections
and the possibilities which uh just beg
further investigation so thanks very
much for listening and I hope you've
enjoyed that Whistle Stop tour around
the asteroid benu